So now, we need to start talking
about something that makes me
wanna cry sometimes with JavaScript.
I don't know about y'all.
But like Cyndi Lauper,
time after time in JavaScript,
the way time and
JavaScript work are complicated.
And part of this is gonna be the answer to
the question, why is my get random element
function not defined when I go into my
console when I load this file locally?
The answer to that is a complicated answer
that we're gonna have to wrap our head
around a few things to understand.
And at the heart of all of
these things is asynchronous or
synchronous code in JavaScript.
So, I hope everybody is buckled up and
has their energy drinks with them and
is armed with a lot of self-compassion for
this being a difficult thing.
Because even folks like myself who've
been working with JavaScript for
a long time find this like a tricky
concept to wrap our heads around.
So do not worry if this starts to
break our brains a little bit,
that means we're doing it right.
You could say that time and
JavaScript are sort of frenemies.
[LAUGH] They have to get along
because we live in universe.
I mean, I don't totally understand
the physics of it, but time exists or
at least we've all agreed that it exists,
and we all have watches and
clocks that say that it exists.
And so our programs also have to do things
over time, running code takes time.
Now, usually, the code that we run in
JavaScript is really, really quick.
If I do console.log,
this will print in a New York minute, and
console.log, this will print
one New York minute later.
Again, we said a New York
minute is an instant.
We are gonna see this print out pretty
much instantaneously in a New York minute,
because these are really,
really quick operations.
So usually, JavaScript can just
run straight through our code,
executing it line by line by line by line,
doing it one thing right after another,
or as we sometimes say executing
that code synchronously.
So one thing after another,
one thing at a time.
But sometimes we need to do
something that takes a long time,
maybe we asked JavaScript to run a while
loop over a million numbers or something.
Or maybe we did some other things
that are gonna take a long time,
which we can talk about in a minute.
And if anybody remembers the theme song
to Dawson's Creek, I don't wanna wait for
my life to be over before I get to
interact with my web browser again.
If JavaScript stopped to wait for
a long, long, long-running operation
because it's running in the web browser,
I wouldn't be able to do anything.
I wouldn't be able to click on buttons.
I wouldn't be able to be seeing other
stuff that's supposed to be changing on
the page.
So we don't wanna wait for
JavaScript to be done with
something that takes a long time.
And the thing about JavaScript is
unlike if folks have worked with other
programming languages,
this might be a term you've heard.
But unlike some other programming
languages, JavaScript really,
there's an asterisk on this.
But in general, JavaScript can
really only do one thing at a time.
A phrase you might have
heard is single threaded.
We're not gonna get into
the technicalities of what that means.
But suffice it to say, just like
Lady Gaga says in her Telephone song,
she says,
I cannot text you with a drink in my hand.
JavaScript cannot do multiple
things at the same time,
I cannot have a drink and
also text with that hand.
Maybe someone really dexterous could,
maybe some other programming language
could, but JavaScript and I cannot.
So JavaScript can really
only do one thing at a time.
So what happens is when we give JavaScript
a task that's gonna take a long time, for
example, here in this code,
where we've got a console.log statement,
that's a New York minute,
that doesn't take much time.
But then we have a built-in
function called setTimeout,
which what setTimeout does is it's
going to give it a little function,
which we call a callback function,
similar to our event handlers.
When JavaScript, we give it a function,
and then we say only run this after
somebody clicked on something
I attached to listener two.
JavaScript is going to do something
similar here, where it's gonna take
that function and run it after
a certain number of milliseconds.
So in this case,
a 1,000 milliseconds or one second.
So, and
one second in computer time is forever.
So this is gonna take forever as
far as JavaScript is concerned.
And so
if we are then logging something else,
what we want is we don't want JavaScript
to stop at that setTimeout line and
freeze our web browser and make it so
we can't do anything else.
So what JavaScript does is it takes that
timeout function that we gave it and
it sort of adds it to, we could think of
it like a to-do list, a task list that it
has somewhere in its internals that it's
remembering stuff it still needs to do.
And it's gonna keep trying to
run the rest of our program.
And say, all right, I'm gonna get to
that long task later, at some point.
And a task like setTimeout
is gonna run asynchronously,
meaning at a different time than kind
of where it appears in the code.
So, synchronous meaning same time,
asynchronous meaning not the same time.
I find this terminology pretty confusing,
so if you do too, we're in the same boat.
But the way this is usually used in
JavaScript is it means, is this code gonna
run kind of as I see it in the program,
or is it gonna run at some other point?
So let's find out what happens
when I run this code here.
So if I run this code, let's see what
order we get these statements in.
You see what happened there?
Let's try it again.
So because we set a timeout for 1 second,
what happened was JavaScript
started running our code.
This will print first, okay,
that seems pretty reasonable,
then it added our console.log.
This will print third to a to-do
list somewhere and said,
hey, let me come back to
this after one second.
Then it kept running our program, and
it printed the final line of our code,
but the second thing to print.
And then it even came back and
returned the value of this whole thing,
which turned out to be undefined.
And then finally, our second was up,
and it ran our function and
a console.log, this will print third.
So that middle line,
that runs asynchronously.
And the reason that we want JavaScript
to work this way is because
JavaScript doesn't have the ability
like some other languages to text and
hold a drink in its hand at the same time.
So what we have to do is text or
put the drink down on a table somewhere,
then send our text, and
then pick the drink back up.
And this is so
that our browser still gets to do stuff.
So we can still click on things, and
we can still interact with our web pages,
even though we know that there's some
other thing that we need to do later
that's taking a long time.
As I said, one of the hardest things in
my opinion to understand about JavaScript
is how it works this way because it's
a kind of a unique model of time.
[LAUGH] But some of the things that
work asynchronously in JavaScript or
that take a lot of time are stuff
like waiting for user events.
So essentially, what we did with that
event handler that we wrote before or
the several event handlers that we've
seen so far is we gave JavaScript
a function to go run at some point
later when the user has clicked on
the thing we care about, or
when the user has moused over the thing.
So we wrote the code at a particular
point in our program, but
that's not necessarily when
it's going to execute.
It's gonna execute later
when something else happens.
Other stuff that takes time is
asking a user for something,
when it says, hey,
where do you wanna save this file?
Or hey, which file do you wanna
upload into this website?
Or can I have permission
to record from your camera?
Things like that, those take time.
Another thing that takes time
that's gonna be relevant for
our doggo game is it takes time to load
data from somewhere else on the interwebs.
So if we want to, let's say, go find an
image somewhere out there on the Internet,
it's gonna take a little bit of time for
JavaScript to say, okay,
you're telling me to go find some image,
I'm gonna go get it.
I'm gonna make a call to that person
who has that image, I'm gonna wait for
them to respond to me, and
then I'm gonna give you the image back,
that's gonna take some time.
It has to maybe go all the way around
the world to find us the image we want of
a doggo that's really special from a
different part of the world, I don't know.
So that is something that is
gonna take a lot of time, and
we need to handle
asynchronously in JavaScript.
So another thing that takes
time in JavaScript is learning
about asynchronous JavaScript.
If you all walk away and have at least
your feet under you of like, okay,
this is something that I don't totally
understand, but I know that I can get it,
that is success as far
as I'm concerned here.
I do not expect you all to
walk all right being like,
I know everything there is to know
about asynchronous JavaScript because
that takes a lot of time to really wrap
your head around what is happening here.
And I haven't even explained really
how this works under the hood or
why it works this way, but
there are some great resources out there.
Of course, MDN has a guide on it,
but there's also a really, really,
really great talk by Philip Roberts
about something called the event loop.
And yes, event as in click events,
and mouse hover events, and whatnot,
and anything else that's taking a long
time in JavaScript, like our timeout.
So I highly recommend as optional
homework, you go check that out and
read up more on asynchronous JavaScript.
There's a lot of other resources courses,
there's some courses on Frontend Masters
that really go into it and
talk about different kind of models
of asynchronous programming.
So we're gonna talk about it in a very
practical sense of how do we do the thing
we're trying to do.
But in terms of really getting the picture
of what JavaScript is doing when it
comes to these long-running tasks and
how it's managing to text and
drink at the same time or at least
pretend to, even though we can't really.
That's something that's a little bit
out of the scope of this course.
>> How much time do you allow for
asynchronous actions?
>> How much time do you allow?
Well, it really depends, which is
a frustrating answer to almost every
question that it is an answer to,
which is a lot in computer science.
It depends, but for
example, for our setTimeout,
which we said we want this to wait
1,000 milliseconds or one second.
That means we need to make,
we are telling JavaScript to wait 1,000
milliseconds before it even tries to
run our little anonymous function,
that console.log, and
this will print third.
Which means it might even take
a little bit more than 1,000
milliseconds before JavaScript
is able to get to it.
Cuz we're basically saying, hey,
JavaScript, wait 1000 milliseconds and
then try to do this.
So we said that what it does is
sort of it adds it to a task list,
a to-do list kind of that's related
to this event loop thing that I'm
waving my hands at and
telling you to go look up later.
It adds this timeout to a task list.
But if there's a lot of other stuff on
that task list, then it might take it even
more than 1,000 milliseconds before
it actually gets to run the code.
So in terms of how much time we allow,
there's not a fixed answer.
For example, if I am calling up a server
on the other side of the planet,
how much time that's gonna take for
my browser to send a message across
the interwebs to somewhere thousands and
thousands and thousands of miles or
kilometers away, and then get an answer
back, that can depend on a lot of things.
It can depend on what the person
who built that website that I'm
talking to did on their end,
how fast it is, how slow it is.
Could depend on whether
a shark has not chewed through
a trans-oceanic data cable somewhere.
It can depend on a lot of things.
So there's not really a hard and
fast answer.